iv PREFAC'E.

which Mr. Chalmers designed for the illustration of the history
of his Diocese and its Cathedral of venerable antiquity.

Brechin was a seat of ecclesiastical institutione long before
King David founded its Bishoprick. An ancient chronicle, speak—
ing of Kenneth Mac Malcolm (who is supposed to have reigned
about the end of the tenth century), says—Hic eet qui tribuit
maynam civitatem Breclme Domino} Here, certainly, as in
a few other places of Scotland‚ were preserved vestiges of that
primaeval Christian establishment which had fallen into strange
laxity of life, and, perhapS, of doctrine, and was destined to give
way altogether before the new and stricter rule introduced by
Saint David. Among the few architectural relies of that early
church, the Culdees of Brechin, like the Culdees of Abernethy,
have left us one of those remarkable “ round towers'' which
serve to perpetuate the memory of the Irish origin of the church
which gave them birth.

ν We have charter evidence of a college of Culdees at Brechin
existing before, and remaining for some time after, the erection
of the Episcopal see. There is proof, indeed, that, upon its
erection, the old Culdee convent and its Prior (submitting‚ it
may be, to stricter rule of discipline), became, as perhaps in
other caseS, the electoral Chapter of the new Bishoprick. But
the head of this Culdee convent, the Abbot of Brechin, had
already become secularised, and had appropriatcd to himself,
and transmitted to his family, the territori-es which his pre-
decessore had administered for the church. During the reign

¹ Apud Innes' Critical Essay, p. 788.

